WITH $27 billion in revenues, daily customer traffic of over 60 million people and a presence in more than 100 counties, employing 761,000
people globally, McDonalds is a true food giant. It is the biggest food chain in
the world with 34,000 restaurants world-wide, selling 75 burgers every second. McDonald’s market penetration is impressive, but looking at its international outreach one continent distinctly lags behind. In 1992 McDonald’s opened its first restaurant
in Africa – in Casablanca, Morocco. 
“Conquering Africa”, as the move was then
dubbed, made McDonald’s present in all continents except Antarctica. Two years
later, in 1994, Egypt’s capital received its first taste of the world-famous
fast food chain, followed by South Africa in 1995, after the fall of apartheid. Since 1995, however, McDonald’s has not spread to any other country in Africa, remaining with
roughly 296 restaurants on the whole continent. That is less than its restaurants in New York City
alone. Of course, the average purchasing power in Africa is incomparably lower than all western and most Asian and South American
countries. But McDonald’s is present in places like Fiji, Samoa, Northern
Marianas and Suriname – tiny countries and territories with limited customer
base. What has stopped it from reaching the continents’ giant - Nigeria - with a population of over 170 million? Why is it not in Nairobi, one
of the fastest growing cities in the world and an East African hub? And why is
in not present in other African cities with considerable number of rich and
middle class inhabitants only waiting to sink their teeth in the staple Big
Mac? What drives the burger There are those who would say McDonald’s absence, given that it has an army of critics who consider its food dangerous junk, is a blessing. That, however, still doesn’t answer how Africa became “blessed” by McDonald’s absence. There are some pointers, though. Except the economic and political stability - two necessary
components for successful operation of a chain like McDonald’s (which in Africa
disqualifies quite a number of countries) – two other data sets are of vital
importance to its international team.  Daily caloric intake and food crisis.  In terms of consumption of calories Africa looks bleak. A
great majority of countries consume less than 2,250 calories per day. The
average for central Africa is only 1,800 calories per day – slightly more than one
Big Mac menu. In Europe, North American and Australia the
average caloric intake per day is about 3,700, or a third larger. The three
African countries in which McDonald’s is present – Morocco, Egypt and South
Africa – have an average daily consumption of calories of between 3,000 -
3,500. Much closer to western countries.  Looking at Maplecroft’s international food security index (2013), which takes into consideration such indices as water security, energy
security and a comprehensive mix of resource security measures, we see an
overwhelming African presence. With the exception of Afghanistan no other
country outside Africa is ranked at “Extreme Risk” of food insecurity. On the
continent there are seven such countries: Sierra Leone, Chad, South Sudan, DR
Congo, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Somalia. On the other hand, Africa boasts only several countries with food insecurity ranked at medium and those countries include Morocco, Egypt and
South Africa.  Rules of the burger –
how to open a chain Following the caloric intake and food security indicators
and correlating them against economic and political stability excludes a great
majority of African countries from contesting for a McDonald’s franchise.  But several others still remain in the race, notably
Nigeria, Kenya, Zimbabwe and Ghana. Unfortunately, there are a number of other constraints to
enjoying a McDonald burger. Kenya, which has recently passed the threshold to become a
low-middle income country according to World Bank, should be a natural
destination for McDonald’s. And maybe it will. So far, however, it faced one
main issue - difficulty of tracing the supply chain. This shortcoming, common to many developing
countries, is of crucial importance. If the restaurant cannot guarantee a safe
source of its primary product it runs tremendous risks of quality fraud. In the
case of a food giant like McDonald’s this may mean losing millions of dollars
due to court cases and deterioration of name and image.  The available Kenyan food suppliers have
failed to be 100% secure in the eyes of McDonald’s demanding international team
of experts.  Promising to provide a global quality of its
food, McDonald’s faces a continuous challenge. In Nigeria frequent power cuts
have been declared an “embarrassment” for many years. The country produces only
about 40% of its total energy needs. As a result sustainable, undisturbed
production is difficult and costly (if fuel generators ought to be used as
backup). The unreliability of energy has been the main deterrent to McDonald’s entry in Africa’s biggest economy.  The company also tried entering Zimbabwe in 1999, but due to
the political unrest which occurred that year, followed by unprecedented
inflation, cancelled the plans. The erratic behavior of President Robert Mugabe over
the years hasn’t given McDonald’s much hope.  After close consideration Ghana’s average disposable income
has been declared too low by McDonald’s to enter the market. In 2011 the
company acknowledged that it would struggle to establish a regular base of
customers in the country.  Despite food insecurity, McDonald’s has been interested
in entering Ethiopia, but the country’s diversity makes it difficult to create
a standard menu and rely on a consistent demand. Majority of the population is
fine with eating red meat, but not pork – forcing the restaurant to introduce
turkey bacon. More complex still is the issue of addressing the largest
Ethiopian minority – the Orthodox Christians.  Their requirements include a Kosher way of dealing with
animals, posing a considerable complication for McDonald’s, though possible to
overcome. However, the 250 days of fasting during the year, required from
believers, renders the prospect of successfully conquering the market for a
food chain like McDonald’s dreary, to say the least. McDonald’s is currently in the process of entering Tunisia, its fourth African country. The planned opening is scheduled for late 2015.  Tunisia matches the restaurant’s outlook perfectly – it is
stable both politically and economically and has a calorie intake similar to that
of Egypt. It is also ranked to have “medium risk” of food insecurity.  Neighbouring Algeria would also qualify if it wasn’t for its
socialist regime which discourages most international companies due to
unfavourable ownership laws.  The sheer necessity to provide a standardised quality across
the globe makes opening a McDonald’s restaurant complicated. All compulsory
resources must be available in the right quality, in the right quantity and in
the right time, unhindered by external pressures.  McDonald’s is merely calculating risks versus its profits -
so far  for most of Africa  the numbers come in at a loss.