IN a recent column in the New York Times, Nicholas Kristof dared to ask the
“awkward question” of why Asian-Americans have been so economically successful
in the US. The most important reasons, he says, are hard work and a reverence
for education:  “The
Asian American Achievement Paradox,” by Jennifer Lee and Min Zhou, notes that
Asian-American immigrants in recent decades have started with one advantage:
They are highly educated…Lee and Zhou note that kids of working-class Asian-
Americans often also thrive, showing remarkable upward mobility…  I’m
pretty sure that one factor is East Asia’s long Confucian emphasis on
education…Immigrant East Asians often [make]  sacrifices for children’s
education, such as giving prime space in the home to kids to study. Kristof
notes research showing that even when IQ scores are equally matched, East Asian
kids tend to get ahead by working harder. 
He also cites experiments indicating
that the stereotype of high intelligence and strong academic potential may be
self- fulfilling—a positive version of “stereotype threat.”  Kristof’s
article is good, and you should read the whole thing. But the focus on East
Asians, and “Confucian” culture, seems misplaced to me because the kind of
education-intensive culture he describes is common to all high-skilled immigrant
groups. Africans win Perhaps
most surprising is that, by many measures, the most-educated immigrant group in
the U.S. isn’t East Asians. It’s Africans. According
to Census data, more than 43% of African immigrants hold a bachelor’s degree or
higher—slightly more than immigrants from East Asia. Nigerian immigrants are
especially educated, with almost two-thirds holding college degrees—a
significantly higher percentage even than Chinese or South Korean immigrants.
African immigrants are also very likely to hold advanced degrees, many of which
are earned at US universities.  By
many measures, African immigrants are as far ahead of American whites in the
educational achievement as whites are ahead of African-Americans. That
education translates into higher household income.  Nigerian-Americans,
for instance, have a median household income well above the American average,
and above the average of many white and Asian groups, such as those of Dutch or
Korean descent. This
isn’t the power of Confucius. It’s the magic of high-skilled immigration. When
a country selects immigrants for their educational background and technical
skills, it doesn’t just get smart people—it gets families committed to
education, hard work and future-oriented life planning.  Every
society has its own version of what Kristof calls Confucian values. They are
universal. And skilled immigration brings the families with those values to the
US from every corner of the globe. That’s
one reason why the US should shift its immigration system to be more like
Canada’s. Canada famously awards prospective immigrants with “points,” based on
education and other skill-based qualifications. The
US obviously attracts lots of high-skilled immigrants too, especially because
of its world-beating university system -  though the country doesn’t allow enough of
them to stay.  Still,
switching to a Canada-style points system would allow the US to take even
bigger gulps from the rivers of talent flowing around the globe. “Open
borders” This
isn’t to ignore the contribution of low-skilled immigrants, who work hard, pay
taxes and commit relatively few crimes, despite what some conservative
politicians now claim. There is nothing at all wrong with low-skilled
immigrants, and they have enriched the U.S. enormously. But unless the US
adopts “open borders” and lets in all immigrants—which is vanishingly
unlikely—it should tip the scales toward the high-skilled. One
additional reason the US should do this is to foster economic equality.  Low-skilled
immigrants compete with native- born Americans who do jobs like fixing houses,
landscaping yards, cleaning buildings and staffing cash registers. That holds
down the wages of less-educated Americans. If the US switched to a Canada-style
system, it would ease up the pressure on working-class Americans. Nor
should the US worry about inflicting harm on the source countries. Some
immigration opponents claim that accepting skilled workers causes “brain drain”
across the rest of the world. But studies show that when skilled people move to
the US, they end up helping their ancestral nations. They send money to
overseas family members, invest in businesses back in their old homes and free
up educational spots for other people in those countries to move up. Brain
drain isn’t a problem. So
instead of singing the praises of Confucian culture, the US should be
harnessing the power of its immigration system to recruit scholastic stars from
all over the globe. An economy with more smart, dedicated, ambitious people—no matter where they come from—is good for everyone, but especially for the
working class.  -This
column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of the editorial board or
Bloomberg LP and its owners.